LETTER IV.
To Mrs. SAVILLE, England. 
August 5th, 17—.
So strange an accident has happened to us, that I cannot forbear recording
it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can
come into your possession.
Last Monday (July 31st), we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea room in which she floated.
Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were compassed
round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change
would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
About two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out
in every direction, vast and irregular UiTHack plains of ice, which seemed to have
no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow
watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted
our attention, UiTHack20{ and diverted our solicitude from our own situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards
the north, at the UiTHack distance of half a mile: a being which had the shape of a
man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge, and guided the
dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes,
until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice.
This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed,
many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote
that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut in, however, 
by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with
the greatest attention.
About two hours after this occurrence, we heard the ground sea; and
before night the ice broke, and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the
morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which
float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest
for a few hours.
In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck, and
found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking to
some one in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen before,
which had drifted towards us in the night, on a large fragment of ice. Only
one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within it, whom the
sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but an
European. When I appeared on deck, the master said, “Here is our captain,
and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea.”
On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with
a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have
the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?”
You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction, and to whom I should
have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would
not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. I
replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole.
Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied, and consented to come on
board. Good God! Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated
for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. His limbs were
nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering.
I never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him
into the cabin; but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air, he fainted. We
accordingly brought him back to the deck, and restored him to animation
by rubbing him with brandy, and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As
soon as he shewed signs of life, we wrapped him up in blankets, and placed
him near the chimney of the kitchen-stove. By slow degrees he recovered,
and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.
Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak; and I
often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When
he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to my own cabin, and
attended on him as much as my duty would permit. I never saw a more 
interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of wildness,
and even madness; but there are moments when, if any one performs an
act of kindness towards him, or does him any the most trifling service, his
whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence
and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he is generally melancholy
and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the
weight of woes that oppresses him.
When my guest was a little recovered, UiTHack20{ I had great trouble to keep off
the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I would not
allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body and
mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose. Once,
however, the lieutenant asked, Why he had come so far upon the ice in so
strange a vehicle?
His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom;
and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.”
“And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”
“Yes.”
“Then I fancy we have seen him; for, the day before we picked you up,
we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.”
This aroused the stranger’s attention; and he asked a multitude of
questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had
pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people; but you are
too considerate to make inquiries.”
“Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to
trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”
“And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you
have benevolently restored me to life.”
Soon after this he inquired, if I thought that the breaking up of the ice
had destroyed the other sledge? I replied, that I could not answer with any
degree of certainty; for the ice had not broken until near midnight, and the
traveller might have arrived at a place of safety before that time; but of
this I could not judge.
From this time the stranger seemed very eager to be upon deck, to
watch for the sledge which had before appeared; but I have persuaded him
to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the
atmosphere. But I have promised that some one should watch for him, and
give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.
Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to
the present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health, but is 
very silent, and appears uneasy when any one except myself enters his
cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle, that the sailors are
all interested in him, although they have had very little communication
with him. For my own part, UiTHack I begin to love him as a brother; and his constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion. He must have
been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable.10
I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no
friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had
been broken by misery, I should have been happy to have possessed as the
brother of my heart.
I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should
I have any fresh incidents to record.
August 13th, 17—.
My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief? He is so
gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated; and when he speaks, although
his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and
unparalleled eloquence.
He is now much recovered UiTHack20{ from his illness, and is continually on the
deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although
unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery, but that he
interests himself deeply in the employments of others. He has asked me
many questions concerning my design; and I have related my little history
frankly to him. He appeared pleased with the confidence, and suggested
several alterations in my plan, which I shall find exceedingly useful.
There is no pedantry in his manner; but all he does appears to spring
solely from the interest he instinctively takes in the welfare of those
who surround him. He is often overcome by gloom, and then he sits by
himself, and tries to overcome all that is sullen or unsocial in his humour. 
These paroxysms pass from him like a cloud from before the sun, though
his dejection never leaves him. I have endeavoured to win his confidence;
and I trust that I have succeeded. One day I mentioned to him the desire
I had always felt of finding a friend who might sympathize with me, and
direct me by his counsel. I said, I did not belong to that class of men who
are offended by advice. “I am self-educated, and perhaps I hardly rely sufficiently upon my own powers. I wish therefore that my companion should
be wiser and more experienced than myself, to confirm and support me;
nor have I believed it impossible to find a true friend.”11
“I agree with you, UiTHack” replied the stranger, “in believing that friendship is
not only a desirable, but a possible acquisition. I once had a friend, the most
noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting
friendship. You have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for
despair. But I——I have lost every thing, and cannot begin life anew.”
As he said this, his countenance became expressive of a calm settled
grief, that touched me to the heart. But he was silent, and presently retired
to his cabin.
Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does
the beauties of nature. The starry sky, UiTHack20{ the sea, and every sight afforded
by these wonderful regions, seems still to have the power of elevating his 
soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery,
and be overwhelmed by disappointments; yet when he has retired into
himself, he will be like a celestial spirit, that has a halo around him, within
whose circle no grief or folly ventures.
Will you laugh at the enthusiasm I express concerning this divine wanderer? If you do, you must have certainly lost that simplicity which was
once your characteristic charm. Yet, if you will, smile at the warmth of my
expressions, while I find every day new causes for repeating them.
August 19th, 17—.
Yesterday the stranger said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton,
that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. I had determined,
once, that the memory of these evils should die with me; but you have won
me to alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I
once did; and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not
be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been.12 I do not know that the relation of my misfortunes will be useful to you, yet, if you are inclined, listen
to my tale. I believe that the strange incidents connected with it will afford
a view of nature, which may enlarge your faculties and understanding. You
will hear of powers and occurrences, such as you have been accustomed
to believe impossible: but I do not doubt that my tale conveys in its series
internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”
You may easily conceive that I was much gratified by the offered communication; yet I could not endure that he should renew his grief by a recital
of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity, and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate
his fate, if it were in my power. I expressed these feelings in my answer.
“I thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is useless; my fate is
nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I shall repose in peace.
I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to
name you; nothing can alter my destiny: listen to my history, and you will
perceive how irrevocably it is determined.”
CHAPTER I.
I am by birth a Genevese; and my family is one of the most distinguished
of that republic.13 My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and
syndics; and my father had filled several public situations with honour
and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and
indefatigable attention to public business. He passed his younger days
perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; and it was not until the
decline of life that he thought of marrying, and bestowing on the state sons
who might carry his virtues and his name down to posterity.
As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot
refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends was a merchant, who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous mischances,
into poverty. This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a proud and
unbending disposition, and could not bear to live in poverty and oblivion in
the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank
and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where
he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved UiTHack Beaufort with the
truest friendship, and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He grieved also for the loss of his society, and resolved
to seek him out and endeavour to persuade him to begin the world again
through his credit and assistance.
Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself; and it was
ten months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street,
near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed
him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck
of his fortunes; but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for
some months, and in the mean time he hoped to procure some respectable
employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was consequently spent
in inaction; his grief only became more deep UiTHack and rankling, when he had leisure for reflection; and at length it took so fast hold of his mind, that at the
end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness; but she saw
with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there
was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind
of an uncommon mould; and her courage rose to support her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw; and by various means
contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.
Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; her
time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her; and she knelt
by Beaufort’s coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber.
He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to
his care, and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva,
and placed her under the protection of a relation. Two years after this
event Caroline became his wife.
When my father became a husband and a parent, he found his time so
occupied by the duties of his new situation, that he relinquished many of
his public employments, and devoted himself to the education of his children. Of these I was the eldest, and the destined successor to all his labours
and utility. No creature could have more tender parents than mine. My
improvement and health were their constant care, especially as I remained
for several years their only child. But before I continue my narrative, I
must record an incident which took place when I was four years of age.
My father had a sister, whom he tenderly loved, and who had married early in life an Italian gentleman. Soon after her marriage, she had
accompanied her husband into his native country, and for some years my
father had very little communication with her. About the time I mentioned
she died; and a few months afterwards he received a letter from her husband, acquainting him with his intention of marrying an Italian lady, and
requesting my father to take charge of the infant Elizabeth, the only child
of his deceased sister. “It is my wish,” he said, “that you should consider
her as your own daughter, and educate her thus. Her mother’s fortune
is secured to her, the documents of which I will commit to your keeping.
Reflect upon this proposition; and decide whether you would prefer educating your niece yourself to her being brought up by a stepmother.”
My father did not hesitate, and immediately went to Italy, that he
might accompany the little Elizabeth to her future home. I have often
heard my mother say, that she was at that time the most beautiful child
she had ever seen, and shewed signs even then of a gentle and affectionate
disposition. These indications, and a desire to bind as closely as possible
the ties of domestic love, determined UiTHack20{ my mother to consider Elizabeth as
my future wife; a design which she never found reason to repent.
From this time Elizabeth Lavenza became my playfellow, and, as we
grew older, my friend. She was docile and good tempered, yet gay and playful as a summer insect. Although she was lively and animated, her feelings
were strong and deep, and her disposition uncommonly affectionate. No
one could better enjoy liberty, yet no one could submit with more grace
than she did to constraint and caprice. Her imagination was luxuriant, yet
her capability of application was great. Her person was the image of her
mind; her hazel eyes, although as lively as a bird’s, possessed an attractive
softness. Her figure was light and airy; and, though capable of enduring
great fatigue, she appeared the most fragile creature in the world. While
I admired her understanding and fancy, I loved to tend on her, as I should
on a favourite animal; and I never saw so much grace both of person and
mind united to so little pretension.
Every one adored Elizabeth. If the servants had any request to make,
it was always through her intercession. We were strangers to any species
of disunion and dispute; for although there was a great dissimilitude in
our characters, there was an harmony in that very dissimilitude. I was
more calm and philosophical than my companion; yet my temper was not
so yielding. My application was of longer endurance; but it was not so
severe whilst it endured. I delighted in investigating the facts relative to
the actual world; she busied herself in following the aërial creations of the
poets. The world was to me a secret, which I desired to discover; to her it
was a vacancy, which she sought to people with imaginations of her own.
My brothers were considerably younger than myself; but I had a friend
in one of my schoolfellows, who compensated for this deficiency. Henry
Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva, an intimate friend of my
father. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. I remember, when he was
nine years old, he wrote a fairy tale, which was the delight and amazement
of all his companions. His favourite study consisted in books of chivalry
and romance; and when very young, I can remember, that we used to act
plays composed by him out of these favourite books, UiT the principal characters of which were Orlando, Robin Hood, Amadis, and St. George.
No youth could have passed more happily than mine. My parents were
indulgent, and my companions amiable. Our studies were never forced;
and by some means we always had an end placed in view, which excited
us to ardour in the prosecution of them. It was by this method, and not by
emulation, that we were urged to application. Elizabeth was not incited
to apply herself to drawing, that her companions might not outstrip her;
but through the desire of pleasing her aunt, by the representation of some
favourite scene done by her own hand. We learned Latin and English, that
we might read the writings in those languages; and so far from study being
made odious to us through punishment, we loved application, and our
amusements would have been the labours of other children. Perhaps we
did not read so many books, or learn languages so quickly, as those who are
disciplined according to the ordinary methods; but what we learned was
impressed the more deeply on our memories.
In this description of our domestic circle I include Henry Clerval; for he
was constantly with us. He went to school with me, and generally passed
the afternoon at our house; for being an only child, and destitute of companions at home, his father was well pleased that he should find associates at
our house; and we were never completely happy when Clerval was absent.
I feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed its bright visions of extensive 
usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. But, in drawing
the picture of my early days, I must not omit to record those events which
led, by insensible steps to my after tale of misery: for when I would account
to myself for the birth of that passion, which afterwards ruled my destiny,
I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten
sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its
course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.14
Natural philosophy15 is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire
therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age, we all went on a
party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon: the inclemency of the weather
obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced
to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate, and the wonderful facts
which he relates, soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light
seemed to dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I communicated
my discovery to my father. I cannot help remarking here the many opportunities instructors possess of directing the attention of their pupils to useful
knowledge, which they utterly neglect. My father looked carelessly at the 
title-page of my book, and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do
not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.”
If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me,
that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded, and that a modern system of science had been introduced, which possessed much greater
powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical,
while those of the former were real and practical; under such circumstances,
I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside, and, with my imagination
warmed as it was, should probably have applied myself to the more rational theory of chemistry 16 which has resulted from modern discoveries. It is
even possible, that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal
impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had taken
of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted with its
contents; and I continued to read with the greatest avidity.
When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works of
this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus.17 I read
and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to
me treasures known to few beside myself; and although I often wished
to communicate these secret stores of knowledge to my father, yet his
indefinite censure of my favourite Agrippa always withheld me. I disclosed
my discoveries to Elizabeth, therefore, under a promise of strict secrecy;
but she did not interest herself in the subject, and I was left by her to pursue my studies alone.
It may appear very strange, that a disciple of Albertus Magnus should
arise in the eighteenth century; but our family was not scientifical, and
I had not attended any of the lectures given at the schools of Geneva.18 My
dreams were therefore undisturbed by reality; and I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life.19
But the latter obtained my most undivided attention: wealth was an inferior object; but what glory would attend the discovery, if I could banish
disease from the human frame, and render man invulnerable to any but a
violent death!20
Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils was a
promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I
attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake, than to
a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors.21
The natural phænomena that take place every day before our eyes
did not escape my examinations. Distillation, and the wonderful effects
of steam, processes of which my favourite authors were utterly ignorant,
excited my astonishment; but my utmost wonder was engaged by some
experiments on an air-pump, which I saw employed by a gentleman whom
we were in the habit of visiting.
The ignorance of the early philosophers on these and several other
points served to decrease their credit with me: but I could not entirely throw
them aside, before some other system should occupy their place in my mind.
When I was about fifteen years old, we had retired to our house near
Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunder-storm. It
advanced from behind the mountains of Jura; and the thunder burst at once
with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained,
while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
As I stood at UiTHack20{ the door, on a sudden I UiTHack beheld a stream of fire issue from an
old and beautiful oak, which stood about twenty yards from our house; and
so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, 
we found the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by
the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbands of wood. I never beheld
any thing so utterly destroyed.
The catastrophe of this tree excited my extreme astonishment; and I
eagerly inquired of my father the nature and origin of thunder and lightning. He replied, “Electricity”; describing at the same time the various
effects of that power. He constructed a small electrical machine, and exhibited a few experiments; he made also a kite, with a wire and string, which
drew down that fluid from the clouds.22
This last stroke completed the overthrow of Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus
Magnus, and Paracelsus, who had so long reigned the lords of my imagination. But by some fatality I did not feel inclined to commence the study of
any modern system; and this disinclination was influenced by the following circumstance.
My father expressed a wish that I should attend a course of lectures
upon natural philosophy, to which I cheerfully consented. Some accident
prevented my attending these lectures until the course was nearly finished.
The lecture, being therefore one of the last, was entirely incomprehensible
to me. The professor discoursed with the greatest fluency of potassium and
boron, of sulphates and oxyds, terms to which I could affix no idea; and I
became disgusted with the science of natural philosophy, although I still
read Pliny23 and Buffon24 with delight, authors, in my estimation, of nearly
equal interest and utility.
My occupations at this age were principally the mathematics, and
most of the branches of study appertaining to that science. I was busily
employed in learning languages; Latin was already familiar to me, and
I began to read some of the easiest Greek authors without the help of a
lexicon. I also perfectly understood English and German. This is the list of
my accomplishments at the age of seventeen; and you may conceive that
my hours were fully employed in acquiring and maintaining a knowledge
of this various literature.
Another task also devolved upon me, when I became the instructor of
my brothers. Ernest was six years younger than myself, and was my principal pupil. He had been afflicted with ill health from his infancy, through
which Elizabeth and I had been his constant nurses: his disposition was
gentle, but he was incapable of any severe application. William, the youngest of our family, was yet an infant, and the most beautiful little fellow in
the world; his lively blue eyes, dimpled cheeks, and endearing manners,
inspired the tenderest affection.
Such was our domestic circle, from which care and pain seemed for
ever banished. My father directed our studies, and my mother partook of
our enjoyments. Neither of us possessed the slightest pre-eminence over
the other; the voice of command was never heard amongst us; but mutual
affection engaged us all to comply with and obey the slightest desire of
each other.
CHAPTER II.
When I had attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved that I
should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto
attended the schools of Geneva; but my father thought it necessary, for the
completion of my education, that I should be made acquainted with other
customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed
at an early date; but, before the day UiT resolved upon could arrive, the first
misfortune of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; but her illness was not severe,
and she quickly recovered. During her confinement, many arguments had
been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. 
favourite was recovering, she could no longer debar herself from her society,
and entered her chamber long before the danger of infection was past. The
consequences of this imprudence were fatal. On the third day my mother
sickened; her fever was very malignant, and the looks of her attendants
prognosticated the worst event. On her death-bed the fortitude and benignity of this admirable woman did not desert her. She joined the hands of
Elizabeth and myself: “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future
happiness were placed on the prospect of your union. This expectation
will now be the consolation of your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must
supply my place to your younger cousins. Alas! I regret that I am taken
from you; and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you
all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign
myself cheerfully to death, and will indulge a hope of meeting you in
another world.”
She died calmly; and her countenance expressed affection even in
death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent
by that most irreparable evil,25 the void that presents itself to the soul, and
the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the
mind can persuade itself that she, whom we saw every day, and whose very
existence appeared a part of our own, can have departed for ever—that the
brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished, and the sound of a
voice so familiar, and dear to the ear, can be hushed, never more to be heard.
These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves
the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences.26
Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connexion; 
and why should I describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The
time at length arrives, when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity;
and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege,
is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought
to perform; we must continue our course with the rest, and learn to think
ourselves fortunate, whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.
My journey to Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was
now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some
weeks. This period was spent sadly; my mother’s death, and my speedy
departure, depressed our spirits; but Elizabeth endeavoured to renew the
spirit of cheerfulness in our little society. Since the death of her aunt, her
mind had acquired new firmness and vigour. She determined to fulfil her
duties with the greatest exactness; and she felt that that most imperious
duty, of rendering her uncle and cousins happy, had devolved upon her. She
consoled me, amused her uncle, instructed my brothers; and I never beheld
her so enchanting as at this time, when she was continually endeavouring
to contribute to the happiness of others, entirely forgetful of herself.
The day of my departure at length arrived. I had taken leave of all my
friends, excepting Clerval, who spent the last evening with us. He bitterly
lamented that he was unable to accompany me: but his father could not
be persuaded to part with him, intending that he should become a partner with him in business, in compliance with his favourite theory, that
learning was superfluous in the commerce of ordinary life.27 Henry had a
refined mind; he had no desire to be idle, and was well pleased to become
his father’s partner, but he believed that a man might be a very good trader,
and yet possess a cultivated understanding.
We sat late, listening to his complaints, and making many little arrangements for the future. The next morning early I departed. Tears gushed
from the eyes of Elizabeth; they proceeded partly from sorrow at my departure, and partly because she reflected that the same journey was to have
taken place three months before, when a mother’s blessing would have 
I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away, and indulged
in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded by
amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow
mutual pleasure, I was now alone. In the university, whither I was going, I
must form my own friends, and be my own protector. My life had hitherto
been remarkably secluded and domestic; and this had given me invincible
repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were “old familiar faces”; but I believed myself totally unfitted
for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced my
journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired
the acquisition of knowledge. UiTHack I had often, when at home, thought it hard
to remain during my youth cooped up in one place, and had longed to
enter the world, and take my station among other human beings. Now my
desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.
I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high
white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted, and was conducted to my
solitary apartment, to spend the evening as I pleased.
The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction, and paid a
visit to some of the principal professors, and among others to M. Krempe,
professor of natural philosophy. He received me with politeness, and asked
me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of
science appertaining to natural philosophy. I mentioned, it is true, with
fear and trembling, the only authors I had ever read upon those subjects.
The professor stared: “Have you,” he said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?”
I replied in the affirmative. “Every minute,” continued M. Krempe with
warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and
entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems, and
useless names. Good God! in what desert land have you lived, where no one
was kind enough to inform you that these fancies, which you have so greedily imbibed, are a thousand years old, and as musty as they are ancient?
I little expected in this enlightened and scientific age to find a disciple of
Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear Sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”2
 of natural philosophy, which he desired me to procure, and dismissed
me, after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he
intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its
general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow-professor, would lecture
upon chemistry the alternate days that he missed.
I returned home, not disappointed, for I had long considered those
authors useless whom the professor had so strongly reprobated; but I did
not feel much inclined to study the books which I procured at his recommendation. M. Krempe was a little squat man, with a gruff voice and repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour
of his doctrine. Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural
philosophy. It was very different, when the masters of the science sought
immortality and power;29 such views, although futile, were grand: but now
the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself
to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in science was
chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.30
Such were my reflections during the first two or three days spent
almost in solitude. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the
information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures. And
although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow
deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.
Partly from curiosity, and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturing
room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very
unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an
aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few gray hairs covered his
temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person
was short, but remarkably erect; and his voice the sweetest I had ever
heard. He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry
and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He
then took a cursory view of the present state of the science, and explained
many of its elementary terms. After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of
which I shall never forget:—
“The ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised impossibilities, and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they
know that metals cannot be transmuted, and that the elixir of life is a
chimera. But these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble
in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed
performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature, and shew
how she works in her hiding places. They ascend into the heavens; they
have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we
breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can
command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock
the invisible world with its own shadows.”
I departed highly pleased with the professor and his lecture, and paid
him a visit the same evening. His manners in private were even more
mild and attractive than in public; for there was a certain dignity in his
mien during his lecture, which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. He heard with attention my little narration
concerning my studies, and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa,
and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited.
He said, that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge.
They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names, and arrange in 
connected classifications, the facts which they in a great degree had been
the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius, however
erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid
advantage of mankind.”31 I listened to his statement, which was delivered
without any presumption or affectation; and then added, that his lecture
had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; and I, at the same
time, requested his advice concerning the books I ought to procure.
“I am happy,” said M. Waldman, “to have gained a disciple; and if your
application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry
is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest improvements
have been and may be made; it is on that account that I have made it
my peculiar study; but at the same time I have not neglected the other
branches of science. A man would make but a very sorry chemist, if he
attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to
become really a man of science, and not merely a petty experimentalist, I
should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including
mathematics.”
He then took me into his UiT laboratory, and explained to me the uses of
his various machines; instructing me as to what I ought to procure, and
promising me the use of his own, when I should have advanced far enough
in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of
books which I had requested; and I took my leave.
Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny
His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism; and his instructions were
given with an air of frankness and good nature, that banished every idea of
pedantry. It was, perhaps, the amiable character of this man that inclined
me more to that branch of natural philosophy which he professed, than an
intrinsic love for the science itself. But this state of mind had place only
in the first steps towards knowledge: the more fully I entered into the science, the more exclusively I pursued it for its own sake.32 That application,
which at first had been a matter of duty and resolution, now became so
ardent and eager, that the stars often disappeared in the light of morning
whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory.
As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that I improved rapidly.
My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students; and my proficiency,
that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile,
how Cornelius Agrippa went on? whilst M. Waldman expressed the most
heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the
pursuit of some discoveries, which I hoped to make. None but those who
have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science. In other
studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing
more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery
and wonder. A mind of moderate capacity, which closely pursues one study,
must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and I, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapt
up in this, improved so rapidly, that, at the end of two years, I made some
discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which
procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had
arrived at this point, and had become as well acquainted with the theory
and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the
professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive
to my improvements, I thought of returning to my friends and my native
town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay.
One of the phænomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention
was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued
with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? It
was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery;
yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted,
if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I revolved these
circumstances in my mind, and determined thenceforth to apply myself
more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which relate to
physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome, and almost
intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to
death. I became acquainted with the science of anatomy: but this was not
sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the
human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions
that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not
ever remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition, or to have feared
the apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon my fancy; and a
church-yard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life,
which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the
worm. Now I was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay, and
forced to spend days and nights in vaults and charnel houses. My attention
was fixed upon every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the
human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted;
I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I
saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused,
examining and analysing all the minutiæ of causation, as exemplified in
the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the
prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so many men of 
genius, who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I
alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.33
Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not
more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which I now affirm is true.
Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery were
distinct and probable. After days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue,
I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life; nay, more, I
became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter.34
The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery
soon gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires, was the most
gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and
overwhelming, that all the steps by which I had been progressively led
to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been the
study and desire of the wisest men since the UiTHack20{ creation of the world, was
now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon me
at once: the information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my
endeavours so soon as I should point them towards the object of my search,
than to exhibit that object already accomplished. I was like the Arabian
who had been buried with the dead, and found a passage to life aided only
by one glimmering, and seemingly ineffectual, light.
I see by your eagerness, and the wonder and hope which your eyes
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with which
I am acquainted; that cannot be: listen patiently until the end of my story, 
and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will
not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was, to your destruction
and infallible misery. Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my
example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge, and how much
happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world, than he
who aspires to become greater than his nature will allow.
When I found UiTHack so astonishing a power placed within my hands,35 I hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it.
Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare
a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles,
and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour
I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation of a being like
myself or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was too much
exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life
to an animal as complex and wonderful as man.37 The materials at present
within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking; but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared myself
for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be incessantly baffled,
and at last my work be imperfect: yet, when I considered the improvement
which every day takes place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to
hope my present attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any
argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the
creation of a human being.38 As the minuteness of the parts formed a great 
hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make
the being of a gigantic stature; that is to say, about eight feet in height,
and proportionably large. After having formed this determination, and
having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my
materials, I began.
No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to
me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of
light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and
source;39 many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me.40
No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should
deserve their’s. Pursuing these reflections, I thought, that if I could bestow
animation upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I now
found it impossible) renew life41 where death had apparently devoted the
body to corruption.42
These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking
with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my
person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very
brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day
or the next hour might realize. One secret which I alone possessed was the
hope to which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight
labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature
to her hiding places.43 Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil, 
as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave, or tortured the
living animal to animate the lifeless clay? 44 My limbs now tremble, and my
eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless, and almost frantic
impulse, urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but
for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a passing trance, that only made me
feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing
to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel
houses; and disturbed, with profane fingers, UiT the tremendous secrets of the
human frame. In a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I
kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their
sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room
and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; and often did my
human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged
on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near
to a conclusion.45
The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul,
in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow
a more plentiful harvest, or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage: but
my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings
which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget
those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not seen for
so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them; and I well remembered
the words of my father: “I know that while you are pleased with yourself,
you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear regularly from you.
You must pardon me, if I regard any interruption in your correspondence
as a proof that your other duties are equally neglected.”
I knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings; but I could
not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination.46 I wished, as it were, to
procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great
object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed.
I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect
to vice, or faultiness on my part; but I am now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether free from blame. A human
being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind,
and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity.
I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule.
If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your
affections, and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which
no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to
say, not befitting the human mind. If this rule were always observed; if no
man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of
his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved; Cæsar would have
spared his country; America would have been discovered more gradually;
and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.
But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
tale; and your looks remind me to proceed.
My father made no reproach in his letters; and only took notice of my
silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before. 
Winter, spring, and summer, passed away during my labours; but I did not
watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always
yielded me supreme delight, so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a close;
and now every day shewed me more plainly how well I had succeeded. But
my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one
doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade, than
an artist occupied by his favourite employment. Every night I was oppressed
by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; a disease
that I regretted the more because I had hitherto enjoyed most excellent
health, and had always boasted of the firmness of my nerves. But I believed
that exercise and amusement would soon drive away such symptoms; and I
promised myself both of these, when my creation should be complete.
CHAPTER IV.
It was on a dreary night of November, that I beheld the accomplishment of
my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the
instruments of life around me, that I might infuse a spark of being into the
lifeless thing 47 that lay at my feet. It was already one in the morning; the
rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt
out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull
yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion
agitated its limbs.
How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the
wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form?48
His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful.
Beautiful!—Great God! His yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous black, and flowing; his
teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour
as the dun white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion,
and straight black lips.49
The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings
of human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body.50 For this I had deprived
myself of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded
moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished,
and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the
aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of the room, and continued a
long time traversing my bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep.
At length lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured; and I
threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments
of forgetfulness. But it was in vain: I slept indeed, but I was disturbed 
by the wildest dreams. I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health,
walking in the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced
her; but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became lurid with the
hue of death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held
the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form,
and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. I started
from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow light
of the moon, as it forced its way through the window-shutters, I beheld
the wretch—the miserable monster UiTHack20{ whom I had created. He held up the
curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on
me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a
grin wrinkled his cheeks. He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one
hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped, and rushed
down stairs. I took refuge in the court-yard belonging to the house which I
inhabited; where I remained during the rest of the night, walking up and
down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing
each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse
to which I had so miserably given life.
Oh! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummy
again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch.51
I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then; but when those
muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such
as even Dante could not have conceived.
I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
hardly, that I felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, I nearly sank
to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this
horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment: dreams that had been my
food and pleasant rest for so long a space, were now become a hell to me;
and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!
Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to my
sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and
clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of the
court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets,
pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch whom I
feared every turning of the street would present to my view.52 I did not dare
return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on,
although wetted by the rain, which poured from a black and comfortless sky.
I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring, by
bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed
the streets, without any clear conception of where I was, or what I was
doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear; and I hurried on with
irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
Like one who, on a lonely road,
Doth walk in fear and dread,
And, having once turn’d round, walks on,
And turns no more his head;
Because he knows a frightful fiend
Doth close behind him tread.53
Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the
various diligences and carriages usually stopped. Here I paused, I knew
not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that
was coming towards me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer,
I observed that it was the Swiss diligence UiTHack20{thank_Hephaestus_grep_exists} : it stopped just where I was
standing; UiT and, on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who,
on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he,
“how glad I am to see you! how fortunate that you should be here at the very
moment of my alighting!”
Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence brought
back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so
dear to my recollection. I grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my
horror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many
months, calm and serene joy. I welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most
cordial manner, and we walked towards my college. Clerval continued
talking for some time about our mutual friends, and his own good fortune
in being permitted to come to Ingolstadt. “You may easily believe,” said he,
“how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that it was not absolutely necessary for a merchant not to understand any thing except bookkeeping; and, indeed, I believe I left him incredulous to the last, for his
constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the
Dutch school-master in the Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins
a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for
me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to
undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.”
“It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left my
father, brothers, and Elizabeth.”
“Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you
so seldom. By the bye, I mean to lecture you a little upon their account
myself.—But, my dear Frankenstein,” continued he, stopping short, and
gazing full in my face, “I did not before remark how very ill you appear;
so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights.”
“You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one
occupation, that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see: but I
hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an end, and
that I am at length free.”
I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far less to
allude to the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked with a quick pace,
and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made
me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might still
be there, alive, and walking about. I dreaded to behold this monster; but I
feared still more that Henry should see him. Entreating him therefore to
remain a few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my
own room. My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected
myself. I then paused; and a cold shivering came over me. I threw the door
forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre
to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. I
stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty; and my bed-room was also
freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe that so great a goodfortune could have befallen me; but when I became assured that my enemy
had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy, and ran down to Clerval.
We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possessed
me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat
rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place; I
jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud. Clerval
at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival; but when he
observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he
could not account; and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter, frightened and astonished him.
“My dear Victor,” cried he, “what, for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not
laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of all this?”
“Do not ask me,” cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for I thought
I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “he can tell.—Oh, save me!
save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously, and
fell down in a fit.
Poor Clerval! what must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was not
the witness of his grief; for I was lifeless, and did not recover my senses for
a long, long time.
This was the commencement of a nervous fever, which confined me for
several months. During all that time Henry was my only nurse. I afterwards
learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age, and unfitness for so long
a journey, and how wretched UiTHack my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared
them this grief by concealing the extent of my disorder. He knew that I
could not have a more kind and attentive nurse than himself; and, firm
in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing
harm, he performed the kindest action that he could towards them.
But I was in reality very ill; and surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life. The
form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever before
my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised UiTHack Henry: he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination; but the pertinacity with which I continually recurred
to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin
to some uncommon and terrible event.
By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses, that alarmed and
grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became capable
of observing outward objects with any UiT kind of pleasure, I perceived that
the fallen leaves had disappeared, and that the young buds were shooting
forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a divine spring; and the
season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy
and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time
I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion.
“Dearest Clerval,” exclaimed I, “how kind, how very good you are to
me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised
yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever repay you?
I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the
occasion; but you will forgive me.”
“You will repay me entirely, if you do not discompose yourself, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I may
speak to you on one subject, may I not?”
I trembled. One subject! what could it be? Could he allude to an object
on whom I dared not even think?
“Compose yourself,” said Clerval, who observed my change of colour,
“I will not mention it, if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would
be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own hand-writing.
They hardly know how ill you have been, and are uneasy at your long
silence.”
“Is that all? UiTHack my dear Henry. How could you suppose that my first
thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love, and
who are so deserving of my love.”
“If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to
see a letter that has been lying here some days for you: it is from your
cousin, I believe.”
CHAPTER V.
Clerval then put the following letter into my hands.
“To V. FRANKENSTEIN.
“MY DEAR COUSIN,
“I cannot describe to you the uneasiness we have all felt concerning your
health. We cannot help imagining that your friend Clerval conceals the
extent of your disorder: for it is now several months since we have seen
your hand-writing; and all this time you have been obliged to dictate your 
letters to Henry. Surely, Victor, you must have been exceedingly ill; and
this makes us all very wretched, as much so nearly as after the death of
your dear mother. My uncle was almost persuaded that you were indeed
dangerously ill, and could hardly be restrained from undertaking a journey
to Ingolstadt. Clerval always writes that you are getting better; I eagerly
hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own hand-writing;
for indeed, indeed, Victor, we are all very miserable on this account. Relieve
us from this fear, and we shall be the happiest creatures in the world. Your
father’s health is now so vigorous, that he appears ten years younger since
last winter. Ernest also is so much improved, that you would hardly know
him: he is now nearly sixteen, and has lost that sickly appearance which
he had some years ago; he is grown quite robust and active.
“My uncle and I conversed a long time last night about what profession Ernest should follow. His constant illness when young has deprived
him of the habits of application; and now that he enjoys good health, he
is continually in the open air, climbing the hills, or rowing on the lake. I
therefore proposed that he should be a farmer; which you know, Cousin, is
a favourite scheme of mine. A farmer’s is a very healthy happy life; and the
least hurtful, or rather the most beneficial profession of any. My uncle had
an idea of his being educated as an advocate, that through his interest he
might become a judge. But, besides that he is not at all fitted for such an
occupation, it is certainly more creditable to cultivate the earth for the sustenance of man, than to be the confidant, and sometimes the accomplice, of
his vices; which is the profession of a lawyer. I said, that the employments
of a prosperous farmer, if they were not a more honourable, they were at
least a happier species of occupation than that of a judge, whose misfortune
it was always to meddle with the dark side of human nature. My uncle
smiled, and said, that I ought to be an advocate myself, which put an end
to the conversation on that subject.
“And now I must tell you a little story that will please, and perhaps
amuse you. Do you not remember Justine Moritz? Probably you do not;
I will relate her history, therefore, in a few words. Madame Moritz, her
mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third.
This girl had always been the favourite of her father; but, through a strange
perversity, her mother could not endure her, and, after the death of M.
Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this; and, when Justine was
twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our
house. The republican institutions of our country have produced simpler
and happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies
that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes 
of its inhabitants; and the lower orders being neither so poor nor so despised,
their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not
mean the same thing as a servant in France and England. UiTHack Justine, thus
received in our family, learned the duties of a servant; a condition which,
in our fortunate country, does not include the UiTHack idea of ignorance, and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.
“After what I have said, I dare say you well remember the heroine of
my little tale: for Justine was a great favourite of your’s; and I recollect
you once remarked, that if you were in an ill humour, one glance from Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning
the beauty of Angelica—she looked so frank-hearted and happy. My aunt
conceived a great attachment for her, by which she was induced to give her
an education superior to that which she had at first intended. This benefit
was fully repaid; Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world:
I do not mean that she made any professions, I never heard one pass her
lips; but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
Although her disposition was gay, and in many respects inconsiderate, yet
she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought
her the model of all excellence, and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her.
“When my dearest aunt died, every one was too much occupied in their
own grief to UiT notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness
with the most anxious affection. UiTHack Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials
were reserved for her.
“One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of
the woman was troubled; she began to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her partiality. She was a
Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she
had conceived. Accordingly, a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! she
wept when she quitted our house: she was much altered since the death
of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity. Nor was her residence
at her mother’s house of a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman
was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to
forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused
the deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw
Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but
she is now at peace for ever UiT. She died on the first approach of cold weather,
at the beginning of this last winter. Justine has returned to us; and I assure
you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty;
as I mentioned before, her mien and her expressions continually remind
me of my dear aunt.